---
title: Finding Your Soul Metric
permalink: /2012-10-24-finding-your-soul-metric
author: Mathias Meyer
twitter: roidrage
created_at: Wed Oct 24 2012 17:00:00 CEST
layout: post
---
Travis has a history of failure. While we're not ashamed to admit that and talk
about them in public, we're also working hard to ensure that we notice early on if
something breaks. We want to find out about it before our users do.

Over the last couple of months we've added a ton of metrics to improve insight
into all parts of Travis. But during these months, we couldn't find the single
metric that would tell us if the system is doing what it's supposed to do, which
is of course to run your builds. It took us quite a while to finally figure out
how to measure something that doesn't happen. That caused me quite a headache,
even though, in hindsight, it was so obvious.

Just last week, we had three unavailabilities due to networking issues on EC2
and two DDoS attacks on GitHub. Earlier this week, EC2 crapped out once again,
taking part of our infrastructure with it.

There was a difference with all these outages. Even though there wasn't much we
could do about them, this time we were alerted about them well in advance. Fun
fact: we found and added the metric that defines whether or not Travis is running
properly. As embarrassing as they were for us, at least we knew about them when
they were happening.

Enough blabber, what's the metric already? After getting repeatedly notified by
users that builds are not being run, it finally hit me one day. The simplest
metric that we can track that shows us how the system is doing is the time since
the last build started.

Yes, it turns out to be that simple. Turns out that this it the sole defining
metric that helps us keep a watchful eye on Travis. Just to be safe, we added
the time since the last build finished. As a general metric we're also tracking
the number of message currently ready to be consumed in RabbitMQ. These metrics
give us a rough clue that something is failing in our infrastructure. Here's a
recent snapshot of what they look like when correlated:

![Graph of Messages vs Build Started/Finished](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/buildvsrabbit-20121024-170411.png)

Here's a more recent graph that shows a database latency spike not long ago and
queues backing up as a consequence. We're still investigating why this happened,
and we'll move to a bigger database setup soon as well. We're also spreading out
the work load even more to keep up with it better.

![Graph of Log Messages vs Log Updates](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/graphs-20121024-182007.png)

### How can I find my soul metric?

Why did this take so long to figure out? The most common question I get from
folks is what kinds of metrics they're supposed to track for their application.

Unfortunately, there is no obvious answer here. If you have a simple web
application, your most common nominator is the number of web requests, and
the response time.

If you have an app that sends a lot of email, your metrics could be the amount
of email being sent, time of an email spent in the delivery queue, time of
network requests to remote email servers, file system utilization. Your core
metric would probably still be the numbers of email sent. If email is being
sent, the system is in a nominal state. If no email is sent, something is likely
to be wrong. Add the number of emails waiting in the queue and you have data to
correlate with.

Sometimes your core metric just isn't obvious in the first place. For us, the
metric only became obvious after we realized that what users would mostly report
to us is that there haven't been any builds running for several hours.

In Travis, every component has its own core metrics. For instance, we have a
process that processes the build logs. From above, the most important metric is
the number of log messages waiting to be processed. To be able to track this, we
recently started collecting more detailed metrics for every single queue in
RabbitMQ.

On Tuesday morning, when EC2 was still having issues, we noticed that log
processing was way behind. Thankfully, we had a second metric in place to track
the averages and 95th percentiles of ActiveRecord updates. Lo and behold, the
95th percentile for these went through the roof, up to 6 seconds for a single
write to the database. Another fun fact: the metrics for single queues was just
added the day before. In fact, I put them in production when the troubles
started and our alerts immediately went off. Here's something visual that shows
the latency spiking and the number of messages queueing up in our logging
queues as a result:

![Graph of latency spike](http://snapshots.librato.com/instruments/7hc3ny1p-317.png)

Notice the latency going up (green graph) and messages piling up. Suddenly the
latency went back to almost being normal, and the queues were slowly drained.

Finding your soul metric can take time. But in the end, it boils down to what
matters most to your users. What's most valuable to them can easily turn into
exactly what you need to track to figure out if, from the user's point of view,
everything is still working.

### Tell me about your monitoring and alerting?

Our infrastructure is still mostly based on what [I wrote about earlier this
year](/2012-04-02-metrics-monitoring-infrastructure-oh-my/),
with a few additions.

To track custom, external metrics like the ones from RabbitMQ or determined by
database updates, we built a small monitoring app based on Celluloid. It polls
data sources every 20 seconds and pushes them directly to [Librato
Metrics](http://metrics.librato.com).

As these metrics are critical to running the platform, a resolution of 20
seconds is pretty good, though we might take them further down to 10 seconds in
the future.

That little app also does threshold-based alerting to our Campfire room. I'm
planning on adding support for Pagerduty and Prowl soon too.

![travisbot messages](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/alerts-20121024-165255.png)

While there are existing tools for monitoring, metrics collection and alerting,
there's no shame in experimenting with your own, if you're aware of the
downsides. Monitoring mostly still sucks, to get better, more people need to
play with more ideas.

If you want to chat monitoring and metrics, Travis or coffee, I'll be in NYC
next week for [devopsdays](http://devopsdays.org/events/2012-newyork/).
