---
title: Metrics, Monitoring, Infrastructure, Oh my!
layout: post
created_at: mon apr 02 22:29:26 edt 2012
permalink: /2012-04-02-metrics-monitoring-infrastructure-oh-my
author: Mathias Meyer
twitter: roidrage
---
Making sure Travis always runs smoothly all the time has become one of our most
important tasks over the recent weeks and months. As a distributed system, there
are a lot of moving parts, and we're putting more and more eyes on every single
piece to make sure they do their job. Obviously there's no need to keep this a
secret, so let's talk about some recent changes to Travis' infrastructure.

Case in point. A recent deployment broke updating profiles temporarily. Here's a
pretty graph showing pretty much the exact point in time when we deployed and
the spike in the number of errors.

![Pretty graph showing deployments](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/Librato_Metrics-20120402-114010.png)

You can see the initial spike, which represents a sudden increase in application
errors. We rolled out a fix shortly after, so things quieted down somewhat.
There's still some noise though, still several 500 errors popping up in our
logs. It took a while to fix those, but you can see it eventually ebbed off
after another deployment.

This is a pretty powerful tool. We added more and more metrics on the
moving parts in Travis. If you want to know why, you should read this [blog
post](http://code.flickr.com/blog/2008/10/27/counting-timing/) from the Flickr
engineering team, and you should definitely watch [Coda Hale's talk Metrics,
Metrics Everywhere!](http://pivotallabs.com/talks/139-metrics-metrics-everywhere).

All these metrics tell us what's going on inside Travis in real time, and they
show us historical growth so we can spot patterns, capacity issues and
unexpected spikes. Here's a another pretty graph of all our internal
notifications. These metrics are pretty new and were put in production last
Friday, but it's still something to enjoy (click to enlarge).

[![Notifications graphed](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/Librato_Metrics-20120402-175556.png)](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/Librato_Metrics-20120402-114119.png)

All these pretty graphs are courtesy of [Librato
Metrics](https://metrics.librato.com/), who were kind enough to offer sponsoring
their service for Travis CI. As we add more and more metrics to Travis they'll
automatically show up in Librato and will be graphed in real time.

The fun doesn't stop there. To make it possible that we can properly graph 404
and 500 errors, we added custom logging. Rails' default logging is not very
helpful for production systems, as it produces a lot of noise. Thanks to Rails 3
and the new notifications introduced with it, it's now possible to override what
Rails does by default and hook in your own logging. That's exactly what we did,
and the result is [lograge](https://github.com/mattmatt/lograge), a little
library that turns Rails' logging events into a neat, single line per request.
You can read all about it in [Mathias' blog
post](http://www.paperplanes.de/2012/3/14/on-notifications-logsubscribers-and-bringing-sanity-to-rails-logging.html).

This helped streamline our logging, making it more and more useful along the
way. All our logs are aggregated in [Papertrail](https://papertrailapp.com/),
who were also kind enough to offer sponsoring their services for Travis.

This allowed us to do something pretty nifty.
[Eric](https://twitter.com/lindvall) of Papertrail wrote a neat little metrics
library for Ruby called [Metriks](https://github.com/eric/metriks), which we
started using in Travis. It collects metrics and can dump them to either a log
file or directly export to [Librato Metrics](https://metrics.librato.com/) or
[Graphite](http://graphite.wikidot.com/). It can also show selected metrics in
the process status, so whenever you run `ps ax`, you can see the current number
of requests per second, or pretty much whatever you fancy. You should go and
read [Eric's blog post on the
library](http://bitmonkey.net/post/18854033582/introducing-metriks).

The really neat bit is that Metriks can log the collected metrics to the log
file. Papertrail can then look for patterns in the aggregated logs and react
accordingly, in this case triggering a webhook  where the metrics are aggregated
and eventually stored in Librato Metrics. Did that just blow your mind?

Here's how that looks coming into Papertrail (click to enlarge).

[![Papertrail Metrics](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/Skitch-20120402-204339.png)](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/Skitch-20120402-204154.png)

This little trick utilizes Papertrail's filters and webhooks alerts, and a nifty
[little app that Eric built](https://github.com/eric/metriks_log_webhook) to
accept the filtered output when a metric is found in the logs.

Why would we want to do that? Simply because it decouples the fact that we're
collecting from where the metrics need to be stored. It's a fully asynchronous
process, and they'll simply show up in Librato eventually. We can also put a
filter on anything in Papertrail and have occurrences in the log be directly
graphed in Librato's Metrics. It's pretty awesome. Every bug fixed is a new
opportunity to add more graphs and add more logging.

For good measure, here's another graph showing the requests we're receiving from
GitHub. It includes the received, accepted and rejected pushes.

![GitHub Requests](http://s3itch.paperplanes.de/Skitch-20120402-202853.png)

The beautiful bit is that we can take any metric and correlate it with others.
That's a pretty powerful tool to find problems in infrastructure.

This is far from all of it, but it's a start. If you want to know more about why
Mathias is so obsessed with metrics and monitoring, you should [read his blog
post about
it](http://www.paperplanes.de/2011/1/5/the_virtues_of_monitoring.html). See you
in the next installment about how we're adding more mustache to Travis'
infrastructure.
