---
title: Books That Helped Shape Our Business
author: Mathias Meyer
twitter: roidrage
created_at: Tue 18 Jun 2013 16:00:00 CEST
layout: post
permalink: /2013-06-18-books-that-shaped-our-business
---
We've been working on turning Travis CI into a business for more than a year
now. While we're working hard to go public for everyone to use our platform for
private repositories, there have been quite a few books that have inspired us.

You'll notice that none of them relates to code or continuous integration, but
that's a good thing. Building a product involves only so much code, but it
involves a lot more of marketing, customer support, improving the user
experience, finding the right price, and a lot more.

I've been reading a lot of books to give me food for thought in these
directions, and I wanted to share some of them.

### [The Knack](http://amzn.to/19IKkYv)

The Knack deals a lot with the every day of running a business. While a lot of
it is drawn from running bike courier and box storage companies, there's a lot
of inspiration to draw for online businesses like ours, in particular when it
comes to numbers (finding the right price, margins, and so on) and handling
customers. A highly recommended and easily approachable read.

### [Pricing With Confidence: 10 Ways to Stop Leaving Money on the Table](http://amzn.to/QxutQq)

Finding the right price for a product is never an easy task. It certainly has
cost us months to get to a point where we're comfortable, and it's thanks to
this book.

If you need to find outside reasoning on how to find the right price for your
product, this book is for you.

To give you some ideas on what the book is about, you should read Amy Hoy's
posts on it: ["The Hazards of Cake and Icing
Pricing"](http://unicornfree.com/2011/biz-book-friday-cost-plus-pricing-price-obsession), ["When Customers Bitch About Your Price"](http://unicornfree.com/2011/when-customers-bitch-about-your-price-biz-book-friday), and ["Will Low Prices Help You Sell More?"](http://unicornfree.com/2011/will-low-prices-sell-more).

### [Don't Just Roll The Dice](http://neildavidson.com/download/dont-just-roll-the-dice/)

I consider this the little brother of "Pricing With Confidence". It's a short
read on finding the right price, and will make you want to know more about
motivations behind higher prices, value addons, and all that.

Best of all: it's free!

### [How To Make Friends and Influence People](http://amzn.to/Q06fNg)

A classic in its own right, dating back to the 1930s, but still very relevant
when it comes to dealing with other people.

Customer support involves people approaching you in all kinds of mood, and it's
the art of turning every customer around by treating them right. This book was
an eye-opener for me in this regard.

It's a must-read not just when you're looking at running your own business, but
to help you deal with all kinds of people every day.

### [Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions](http://amzn.to/OEgK94)

This is an incredible book, full of empirical proof on how humans decide on
things. It starts out with a great bang that'll help you structure your pricing
right, gives you inspiration on how you can utilize free stuff to sell your
product, and a lot more.

An inspiration read, full of good stuff. Best of all, it's all backed up by
studies to give you a great insight on how humans decide on things.

### [Start Small, Stay Small](http://amzn.to/QhEXCA)

A book full of good examples on running a profitable small business without
feeling the need to go for insane growth, but rather to go for a profitable
product, how to market it, and how to find the right audience. An easy but great
read.

### [The Power of Habit](http://amzn.to/13TDI2U)

A great exploration of human habits and how companies utilize them to benefit
their own business and how they shape our every day. It may not seem about
business on the surface, but everything in this book is very applicable for
turning your customers into loyal customers and making them happy.

### [Drop The Pink Elephant: 15 Ways to Say What You Mean...and Mean What You Say](http://amzn.to/126bq2x)

This book has taught us a lot on how we talk to customers, and how we compose
blog posts, marketing messages, product information, and even how we write our
post-mortems.

It's about dropping ambiguous words from what you say to other people and be
more to the point. Instead of saying no, don't or anything negative, it's about
focusing on positive outcome, on focusing what you want to achieve.

Most importantly, this book is about honesty, an honorable trait in any
business.
